In this lecture, you'll learn how to configure access control lists with a lab demo. So, here's a lab.
I've got to open in GNS3 here and I've got a couple of routers, R1 and R2.
I've got PC1 and PC2 which is in
10.0.1.0/24 subnet.
And PC3 is in 10.0.2.0/24.
I've already configured the routing.
So,
if I console on to PC1 and let's try pinging R2 at 10.0.0.2.
So pinging 10.0.0.2 from PC1 works OK.
I know for sure it's going to work from PC2 as well because it's in the same subnet.
But let's just do it anyway.
So ping 10.0.0.2 from here as well and let's check everything's OK from our 10.0.2.0/24 subnet as well.
So I'll 10.0.0.2 which is R2 from there as well.
OK, so connectivity is all working just fine.
Let's have a look at the routing table on R1 so I'll jump on there.
I do a show ip route and try to do it without a typo. And I've just got my connected and local routes on there.
And because R2 is also on the 10.0.0.0/24 network, 10.0.0.2, that's why I've got connectivity
everywhere.
OK, looking back at the topology diagram and the scenario where that we are the network administrator
and we've been given some security tasks to secure the network.
So the first scenario is the PCs in the 10.0.2.0/24 network should not have any connectivity
to R2 at 10.0.0.2, but that the PCs in the 10.0.1.0/24 subnet,
they should have connectivity to R2 and also PC3 in 10.0.2.0/24 still should have connectivity
to 10.0.1.0/24 as well.
So usually when we are configuring ACL to do security, we'll secure as close to the source as possible so
that traffic isn't going over any part of the network that it doesn't need to.
But if we look at the scenario here, let's say we've been given a task that we have to configure each a standard
numbered access list To do that and it has to be on R1. So we could do it inbound on
fa2/0 at the bottom here. With a standard ACL, you can only specify the source address. To be
able to specify source and destination,
that it's going to, that needs to be an extended or a named extended ACL.
So what we want to do is we want to block traffic from 10.0.2.0/24 to R2.
But we need to allow traffic from 10.0.2.0 to 10.0.1.0. So we can't put the ACL inbound on that
fa2/0 interface
in R1, because we block traffic from 10.0.2.0 we would be blocking it going to R2. But we'd
be blocking it to the 10.0.1.0 subnet as well.
So the only way that we can do this task using a numbered standard ACL, is by putting it on that outside
fa0/0 interface on R2.
So if that's not clear yet, let's do it and then you'll see what I mean.
So, we want to block traffic from 10.0.2.0, allow traffic from 10.0.1.0.
So let's go on the command line on R1.
I'll go to global config and I'll make this access-list 1 and I'm going to deny traffic from the
10.0.2.0/24 subnet.
The wildcard mask is 0.0.0.255 because it's a /24 and it's a
standard ACL, I can tell because it's number 1.
So I can only specify the source address. So that's all that
I need to put in here. Now in all of your access-list, there is always an implicit 'deny any any' at the bottom
of the list.
But I need to
allow traffic from the
10.0.1.0 network.
So for that I'm going to
do access-list 1 permit 10.0.1.0 0.0.0.255
again. And that's all I need to do apart
from actually applying the access-list of course. To do that, let's look at the topology diagram again.
And I'm going to do it on the outside interface fa0/0.
So back on the command line, I go to interface fa0/0 and the command now is
ip access-group 1 out.
And I'm doing it in the direction towards R2 so that is in the outbound direction.
Looking at the apology diagram again, if I wanted to control traffic going from the 10.0.2.0
network to R2, I could either do it inbound on fa2/0 as it comes into R1 or I can do
it outbound on fa0/0 as it goes out of R1 on its way to R2.
But like we said earlier, you can't do that in this particular scenario because if I blocked traffic
coming from 10.0.2.0 coming in on fa2/0, it wouldn't just stop it getting it to R2.
It would stop it getting to 10.0.1.0 network as well.
And I need to allow that. So that's my whole config. Let's just have look at it again.
So I denied traffic from 10.0.2.0. I permitted traffic from 10.0.1.0 and applied the outbound
on the fa0/0 interface.
So let's check that it is working.
So let's go on to PC1 first and check that PC1 still has connectivity to the router. So I'll
ping 10.0.0.2 and that is all good.
PC1 has
and I know that PC2 has as well.
PC3 should not have connectivity 10.0.0.2,
so let's check that. Ping 10.0.0.2 and there we go. The ping fails.
So my access list is working but it should have connectivity to the PCs in the other subnet so I'll ping
PC1 at 10.0.1.10 and that is successful.
So that is the first task completed.
We used a numbered standard ACL to block traffic from the 10.0.2.0 subnet to R2 at 10.0.0.2 but
allow all of our other traffic everywhere else.
OK, so that was a numbered standard ACL.
Next up, let's have a look at a numbered extended ACL.
And if I go back to the topology again, the scenario this time is going to be we're going to permit
telnet from PC1 to R2. Let' say that PC1 is our administrator workstation and telnet is a way that
you can remotely get onto the command line on our router.
We'll cover it in more detail in a later section.
So we're going to allow it from PC1, but PC1 is the only administrator workstation.
So no other PC, no other subnet is allowed to telnet onto R2. So let's configure that.
So I'll go on to the command line on R1 again and in my ACL I'm going to do an extended ACL which
allows traffic from 10.0.1.10 to 10.0.0.2 when it's telnet traffic, but
denies it from everywhere else and is going to allow all other traffic.
So let's go onto R1 to configure this. So, let's go down a few lines.
I'll say access-list, and it's an extended ACL this time, so that starts with 100.
I'll use that for my number and I'm going to permit traffic from host 10.0.1.10, but I'm
going to specify its telnet traffic.
So I need to say this is TCP, so I permit TCP and I'm going to see from host 10.0.1.10,
and it's going to host R2 at 10.0.0.2 and then equals the port is telnet.
I could also have said equals 23. The router would take that command as well.
So I'm allowing it from PC1.
I don't want to allow it from any other PC in that subnet. So I say access-list 100
and I'm going to deny TCP from the 10.0.1.0 0.0.0.255 subnet
going to host 10.0.0.2 equals telnet.
And you can see it's important I get these in the right way. If I put that second command first, I'd
be blocking traffic from all hosts on the 10.0.1.0 subnet, including PC1.
So I need to make my more specific commands up at the top of the ACL.
And then I want to allow all other traffic.
I'm just controlling telnet here.
So I need to also say at access-list 100 permit ip any any to allow all other traffic and not overrides
the 'implicit deny any any' at the bottom of the ACL.
The 'implicit deny any any' is still down there at the bottom but the router reads the 'permit ip any any'
first,
so this is going to allow all traffic apart from what I explicitly denied.
OK, so that's my ACL configured.
And importantly, we need to remember to apply it at
the interface. It's really easy to forget to do this.
So you're looking at the topology diagram and it's always best practice to secure as close to the source
as you can. So here,
we could put the ACL either inbound on this interface and outside here, which is
fa1/0 on the router.
Actually, let me make a note just to make that clear. So I'll save this as fa1/0 and
that is the interface that we're going to put this on.
Let me try to clear that up a bit.
OK, that's fine.
OK, so we're going to put it on fa1/0.
Let me just cleared that up a bit, making mess in my topology diagram here. OK,
so it's going to go inbound there.
I could also put outbound on fa0/0, but I've already got an ACL configured on there, the ACL
that I did earlier,
my standard numbered.
You can only have one ACL per interface, per direction. So I'm going to put it on fa1/0. So
back on R1, I'll go interface fa1/0 and it's ip access-group 100.
And it's in this time because it's coming in
fa1/0 going out
fa0/0.
OK. So that's my ACL configured.
Let's test it next.
So if I go on to PC1, I should be able to telnet to 10.0.0.2. Telnet's already
been configured and there you go.
I can see it's working because I'm getting the password prompt. So I'm able to telnet onto R2 from
PC1.
I should not be able to get on there from PC2, so let's check that.
I'm going to PC2 and I'll telnet to 10.0.0.2 and there you go - destination unreachable.
That's good.
It's because my ACL was blocking the traffic, but it should just be telnet traffic. I should be
ping 10.0.0.2 and that's working.
So that is all good.
Actually, looking back at the topology diagram, again, I didn't need to specify anything about PC3
because I already had my first ACL blocking traffic going out to R2 from it.
So it was getting blocked already.
OK, so that was a numbered standard and a numbered extended.
I'll do a named ACL in the next lecture because I feel like this one's going on for a little while now.
So go get yourself a cup of coffee if you want to.
I'll see you back here for named ACLs.